#The Little Conclusion

> This last chapter was kindly contributed by Jeremy Ashkenas, the author of CoffeeScript

You've reached the end of the Little Book on CoffeeScript, and now you know just about everything you'll need. CoffeeScript is a little language at heart, and if you know JavaScript and have a sense of the philosophy behind the changes that CoffeeScript makes to JavaScript, you should be able to get up and running very quickly indeed.

##Philosophy

Unlike most programming languages, CoffeeScript was never designed from the ground up. It has always been an attempt to express core JavaScript concepts in as simple and minimal a syntax as we can find for them.

Let's take a simple function. To produce the square of `x`, we multiply `x` by itself. In JavaScript:

    var square = function(x) {
      return x * x;
    };
    
To derive the CoffeeScript for this, let's think through the steps it would take to reduce this function to its essential features. 

 * We can understand the code perfectly well without the semicolons, so let's drop those.
 * Instead of using `{` and `}` to delimit the body of the function, let's use the indentation that's already present on the page. 
 * It's clear that we're defining a new function, so let's drop the redundant `var` in front of the assignment. 
 * Every construct in CoffeeScript should be an expression with a value, so the natural value of a function body is the last line of code it executes ... allowing us to omit the `return`. 
 * Finally, we replace `function( input ){ output }` with a function literal that visually represents the idea that the input of a function "points to" the output: `(input) -> output`. 
 
Voilá, the CoffeeScript version:

    square = (x) -> x * x
    
Every language feature in CoffeeScript has been designed using this kind of process: attempt to take the beautiful dynamic semantics of JavaScript -- object literals, function expressions, prototypal inheritance -- and express them in a clean, readable, minimal way. 

##It's Just JavaScript

CoffeeScript tries to be a deeply pragmatic language. To be honest, it's probably too pragmatic for its own good. The golden rule of CoffeeScript is: "It's just JavaScript". 

We want to embrace the limitations of compiling to JavaScript by only implementing things that can be expressed in simple JS, and leaving fancier compilations to [other languages](https://github.com/jashkenas/coffee-script/wiki/List-of-languages-that-compile-to-JS). When you run a script, there is no CoffeeScript interpreter running within the browser, no core library you have to include on the page, and ideally (although we bend this rule in a few places) no special helper functions generated alongside your code.

The downside of this approach is that more invasive improvements to JavaScript are impossible. For example, it would be nice if `list[-1]` in CoffeeScript could return the last item in the list. At first glance, it seems simple enough to implement, and would be useful. Unfortunately, any expression may be used to index into an array, so with negative array indices you would have to add a special check to every `list[x]` operation to ask if `x` is a positive number or a negative one. This would take CoffeeScript away from JavaScript semantics, and more importantly, JavaScript levels of performance -- the array accesses in your inner loops would slow down considerably. For this reason, CoffeeScript doesn't add negative array indices to the language.

The upside of this approach is that CoffeeScript is inherently compatible with every JavaScript runtime. Because we can compile to efficient, lowest-common-denominator code, CoffeeScript runs as well as JavaScript in every browser, in Node.js, in Rhino, in Photoshop and Illustrator -- in short, everywhere JavaScript can run. If you want to use CoffeeScript for a project, for a component, or even just for a single file, you don't have to sacrifice performance or compatibility with other JavaScript libraries.

##Build Your Own JavaScript

There's a hidden motive running as a subtext beneath CoffeeScript. I hope that this book doesn't merely serve as an introduction, but spurs you to experiment with compile-to-JavaScript languages of your very own.

To that end, the CoffeeScript compiler has been [fully annotated with commentary](http://coffeescript.org/documentation/docs/grammar.html) to make it easier to get started prototyping changes and improvements. The entire thing is only around 2,500 lines of code, and there have been a [number](https://github.com/satyr/coco) of [interesting](http://weepy.github.com/kaffeine/) [forks](http://disnetdev.com/contracts.coffee/) already that push JavaScript in different directions.

If you've ever felt confined by JavaScript, there's no need to wait around for browser implementors or the slow march of the standards process. By using a compile-to-JS language, you can give yourself the JavaScript of your dreams today. I'm looking forward to seeing more little languages out there in the wild soon.